<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Admiral</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The disapproval which Moret had expressed at Savrola’s determination to go to the State Ball was amply justified by the result. Every paper, except those actually controlled by the party organisation, commented severely or contemptuously on his action. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Hour</i> alluded to the groans with which the crowd had received him, as marking the decline of his influence with the masses and the break-up of the Revolutionary party. It also reminded its readers that social distinction was always the highest ambition of the Demagogue, and declared that, by accepting the President’s invitation, Savrola had revealed “his sordid personal aims.” The other Government organs expressed a similar opinion in an even more offensive manner. “These agitators,” said <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Courtier</i>, “have at all times in the history of the world hankered after titles and honours, and the prospect of mixing with persons of rank and fashion has once again proved irresistible to an austere and unbending son of the people.” This superior vulgarity, though more unpleasant, was less dangerous than the grave and serious warnings and protests which the Democratic journals contained. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Rising Tide</i> said plainly that, if this sort of thing continued, the Popular party would have to find another leader, “One who did not cringe to power nor seek to ingratiate himself with fashion.”</p>
			<p>Savrola read these criticisms with disdain. He had recognised the fact that such things would be said, and had deliberately exposed himself to them. He knew he had been unwise to go: he had known that from the first; and yet somehow he did not regret his mistake. After all, why should his party dictate to him how he should rule his private life? He would never resign his right to go where he pleased. In this case he had followed his own inclination, and the odium which had been cast upon him was the price he was prepared to pay. When he thought of his conversation in the garden, he did not feel that he had made a bad bargain. The damage however must be repaired. He looked over the notes of his speech again, polished his sentences, considered his points, collected his arguments, and made some additions which he thought appropriate to the altered state of public feeling.</p>
			<p>In this occupation the morning passed. Moret came in to luncheon. He refrained from actually saying “I told you so,” but his looks showed that he felt his judgment was for the future established on unshakable foundations. His was a character easily elated or depressed. Now he was gloomy and despondent, regarding the cause as already lost. Only a forlorn hope remained; Savrola might express his regret at the meeting, and appeal to the people to remember his former services. He suggested this to his leader, who laughed merrily at the idea. “My dear Louis,” he said, “I shall do nothing of the sort. I will never resign my own independence; I shall always go where I like and do what I like, and if they are not pleased, they can find someone else to discharge their public business.” Moret shuddered. Savrola continued: “I shall not actually tell them so, but my manner will show them that I fear their reproaches as little as Molara’s enmity.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps they will not listen; I hear reports that there will be some hostility.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I shall make them listen. There may be some howling at first, but they will change their note before I have gone very far.”</p>
			<p>His confidence was contagious. Moret’s spirits revived under its influence and that of a bottle of excellent claret. Like Napoleon the Third, he felt that all might yet be regained.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the President was extremely well satisfied with the first result of his schemes. He had not foreseen that Savrola’s acceptance of the invitation to the ball would involve him in so much unpopularity, and, although it was a poor compliment to himself, it was an unexpected advantage. Besides, as Miguel had remarked, everything was going on very well in other directions. He had hardened his heart and dismissed his scruples; stern, bitter necessity had thrust him on an unpleasant course, but now that he had started he was determined to go on. In the meantime affairs pressed on all sides. The British Government were displaying an attitude of resolution on the African Question. His violent despatch had not settled the matter, as he had hoped and even anticipated; it had become necessary to supplement his words by actions. The African port must not be left undefended; the fleet must go there at once. It was not a moment when he could well afford to be without the five ships of war whose presence in the harbour overawed many of the discontented; but he felt that a vigorous foreign policy would be popular, or at least sufficiently interesting to keep the public mind from domestic agitation. He also knew that a disaster abroad would precipitate a revolution at home. It was necessary to be very careful. He recognised the power and resources of Great Britain; he had no illusions on the subject of the comparative weakness of Laurania. In that indeed lay their only strength. The British Government would do all in their power to avoid fighting (bullying, polite Europe would call it) so small a State. It was a game of bluff; the further he could go, the better for the situation at home, but one step too far meant ruin. It was a delicate game to play, and it taxed to the utmost the energies and talents of a strong, able man.</p>
			<p>“The Admiral is here, Your Excellency,” said Miguel entering the room, followed immediately by a short, red-faced man in naval uniform.</p>
			<p>“Good-morning, my dear de Mello,” cried the President, rising and shaking the newcomer’s hand with great cordiality. “I have got some sailing-orders for you at last.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said de Mello bluntly, “I am sick of lying up waiting for your agitators to rise.”</p>
			<p>“There is work of a difficult and exciting nature before you. Where’s that translation of the cipher telegram, Miguel? Ah, thank you⁠—look here, Admiral.”</p>
			<p>The sailor read the paper, and whistled significantly. “It may go further than you wish, Molara, this time,” he said unceremoniously.</p>
			<p>“I shall place the matter in your hands; you will be able to save this situation, as you have saved so many others.”</p>
			<p>“Where did this come from?” asked de Mello.</p>
			<p>“From French sources.”</p>
			<p>“She is a powerful ship, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Aggressor</i>⁠—latest design, newest guns, in fact all the modern improvements; I have nothing that she could not sink in ten minutes; besides, there are some gunboats there as well.”</p>
			<p>“I know the situation is difficult,” said the President; “that is why I am entrusting it to you! Now listen; whatever happens I don’t want fighting; that would only end in disaster; and you know what disaster would mean here. You must argue and parley and protest on every point, and cause as much delay as possible. Consult me by telegraph on every occasion, and try to make friends with the English admiral; that is half the battle. If it ever comes to a question of bombardment, we shall give in and protest again. I will have your instructions forwarded to you in writing this evening. You had better steam to-night. You understand the game?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said de Mello, “I have played it before.” He shook hands and walked to the door.</p>
			<p>The President accompanied him. “It is possible,” he said earnestly, “that I shall want you back here before you have gone very far; there are many signs of trouble in the city, and after all Strelitz is still on the frontier waiting for a chance. If I send for you, you will come?” There was almost an appealing note in his tone.</p>
			<p>“Come?” said the Admiral. “Of course I will come⁠—full steam ahead. I have had my big gun trained on the Parliament House for the last month, and I mean to let it off one day. Oh, you can trust the fleet.”</p>
			<p>“Thank God I never doubted that,” said the President with some emotion, and shaking de Mello’s hand warmly, he returned to his writing-table. He felt that the Admiral was thoroughly loyal to the Government.</p>
			<p>These men who live their lives in great machines, become involved in the mechanism themselves. De Mello had lived on warships all his days, and neither knew nor cared for anything else. Landsmen and civilians he despised with a supreme professional contempt. Such parts of the world as bordered on the sea, he regarded as possible targets of different types; for the rest he cared nothing. With equal interest he would burst his shells on patriots struggling to be free or foreign enemies, on a hostile fort or on his native town. As long as the authority to fire reached him through the proper channel, he was content; after that he regarded the question from a purely technical standpoint.</p>
			<p>The afternoon was far advanced before the President finished the varied labours of his office. “There is a great meeting to-night, is there not?” he asked Miguel.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the Secretary, “in the City-Hall; Savrola is going to speak.”</p>
			<p>“Have you arranged about an opposition?”</p>
			<p>“Some of the secret police are going to make a little, I believe; Colonel Sorrento has arranged that. But I fancy Señor Savrola’s party are rather displeased with him, as it is.”</p>
			<p>“Ah,” said Molara, “I know his powers; he will tear their very hearts out with his words. He is a terrible force; we must take every precaution. I suppose the troops have been ordered to be under arms? There is nothing he cannot do with a crowd⁠—curse him!”</p>
			<p>“The Colonel was here this morning; he told me he was making arrangements.”</p>
			<p>“It is good,” said the President; “he knows his own safety is involved. Where do I dine to-night?”</p>
			<p>“With Señor Louvet, at the Home Office, an official dinner.”</p>
			<p>“How detestable! Still he has a plain cook and he will be worth watching to-night. He gets in such a state of terror when Savrola holds forth that he is ridiculous. I hate cowards, but they make the world the merrier.”</p>
			<p>He bade the Secretary good-night and left the room. Outside he met Lucile. “Dearest,” he said, “I am dining out to-night, an official dinner at Louvet’s. It is a nuisance, but I must go. Perhaps I shall not be back till late. I am sorry to leave you like this, but in these busy days I can hardly call my soul my own.”</p>
			<p>“Never mind, Antonio,” she replied; “I know how you are pressed with work. What has happened about the English affair?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t like the situation at all,” said Molara. “They have a Jingo Government in power and have sent ships as an answer to our note. It is most unfortunate. Now I have to send the fleet away⁠—at such a moment.” He groaned moodily.</p>
			<p>“I told Sir Richard that we had to think of the situation here, and that the despatch was meant for domestic purposes,” said Lucile.</p>
			<p>“I think,” said the President, “that the English Government also have to keep the electorate amused. It is a Conservative ministry; they must keep things going abroad to divert the public mind from advanced legislation. What, more still, Miguel?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Sir; this bag has just arrived, with several important despatches which require your immediate attention.”</p>
			<p>The President looked for a moment as if he would like to tell Miguel to take himself and his despatches to the infernal regions; but he repressed the inclination. “Good, I will come. I shall see you at breakfast to-morrow, my dear, till then, farewell,” and giving her a weary smile he walked off.</p>
			<p>Thus it is that great men enjoy the power they risk their lives to gain and often meet their deaths to hold.</p>
			<p>Lucile was left alone, not for the first time when she had wanted companionship and sympathy. She was conscious of an unsatisfactory sensation with regard to existence generally. It was one of those moments when the prizes and penalties of life seem equally stale and futile. She sought refuge in excitement. The project she had conceived the night before began to take actual shape in her mind; yes, she would hear him speak. Going to her room she rang the bell. The maid came quickly. “What time is the meeting to-night?”</p>
			<p>“At eight, Your Excellency,” said the girl.</p>
			<p>“You have a ticket for it?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my brother⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well, give it to me; I want to hear this man speak. He will attack the Government; I must be there to report to the President.”</p>
			<p>The maid looked astonished, but gave up the ticket meekly. For six years she had been Lucile’s maid, and was devoted to her young and beautiful mistress. “What will Your Excellency wear?” was her only remark.</p>
			<p>“Something dark, with a thick veil,” said Lucile. “Don’t speak of this to anyone.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no, Your Ex⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Not even to your brother.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, Your Excellency.”</p>
			<p>“Say I have a headache and have gone to bed. You must go to your room yourself.”</p>
			<p>The maid hurried off to get the dress and bonnet. Lucile felt full of the nervous excitement her resolve had raised. It was an adventure, it would be an experience, more than that, she would see him. The crowd⁠—when she thought of them she felt a little frightened, but then she remembered that women frequently went to these demonstrations, and there would be plenty of police to keep order. She dressed herself hastily in the clothes that the maid brought, and descending the stairs, entered the garden. It was already dusk, but Lucile had no difficulty in finding her way to a small private gate in the wall, which her key unlocked.</p>
			<p>She stepped into the street. All was very quiet. The gas lamps flared in a long double row till they almost met in the distant perspective. A few people were hurrying in the direction of the City-Hall. She followed them.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
