<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Head of the State</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The carriage and its escort passed the ancient gateway and driving through a wide courtyard drew up at the entrance of the palace. The President alighted. He fully appreciated the importance of retaining the good will and support of the army, and immediately walked up to the officer who commanded the Lancers. “None of your men hurt, I trust,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Nothing serious, General,” replied the subaltern.</p>
			<p>“You handled your troop with great judgment and courage. It shall be remembered. But it is easy to lead brave men; they shall not be forgotten. Ah, Colonel, you are quite right to come to me. I anticipated some trouble with the disaffected classes, so soon as it became known that we were still determined to maintain law and order in the State.” These last words were spoken to a dark, bronzed man who had hurriedly entered the courtyard by a side gate. Colonel Sorrento, for such was the newcomer’s name, was the military chief of the Police. Besides filling this important office, he discharged the duties of War-Minister to the Republic. The combination enabled the civil power to be supplemented by the military with great and convenient promptitude, whenever it was necessary or desirable to take strong measures. The arrangement was well suited to the times. Usually Sorrento was calm and serene. He had seen many engagements and much war of the type which knows no quarter, had been several times wounded, and was regarded as a brave and callous man. But there is something appalling in the concentrated fury of a mob, and the Colonel’s manner betrayed the fact that he was not quite proof against it.</p>
			<p>“Are you wounded, Sir?” he asked, catching sight of the President’s face.</p>
			<p>“It is nothing⁠—a stone; but they were very violent. Someone had roused them; I had hoped to get away before the news was known. Who was it spoke to them?”</p>
			<p>“Moret, the Civic Councillor, from the balcony of the hotel. A very dangerous man! He told them they were betrayed.”</p>
			<p>“Betrayed? What audacity! Surely such language would come within the 20th Section of the Constitution: ‘Inciting to violence against the person of the Head of the State by misrepresentation or otherwise.’ ” The President was well versed in those clauses of the public law which were intended to strengthen the hands of the Executive. “Have him arrested, Sorrento. We cannot allow the majesty of Government to be insulted with impunity⁠—or stay, perhaps it would be wiser to be magnanimous now that the matter is settled. I do not want a State prosecution just at present.” Then he added in a louder voice: “This young officer, Colonel, discharged his duty with great determination⁠—a most excellent soldier. Please see that a note is made of it. Promotion should always go by merit, not by age, for services and not for service. We will not forget your behaviour, young man.”</p>
			<p>He ascended the steps and entered the hall of the palace, leaving the subaltern, a boy of twenty-two, flushed with pleasure and excitement, to build high hopes of future command and success.</p>
			<p>The hall was spacious and well-proportioned. It was decorated in the purest style of the Lauranian Republic, the arms of which were everywhere displayed. The pillars were of ancient marble and by their size and colour attested the wealth and magnificence of former days. The tessellated pavement presented a pleasing pattern. Elaborate mosaics on the walls depicted scenes from the national history: the foundation of the city; the peace of 1370; the reception of the envoys of the Great Mogul: the victory of Brota; the death of Saldanho, that austere patriot, who died rather than submit to a technical violation of the Constitution. And then coming down to later years, the walls showed the building of the Parliament House: the naval victory of Cape Cheronta, and finally the conclusion of the Civil War in 1883. On either side of the hall, in a deep alcove, a bronze fountain, playing amid surrounding palms and ferns, imparted a feeling of refreshing coolness to the eye and ear. Facing the entrance was a broad staircase, leading to the state rooms whose doors were concealed by crimson curtains.</p>
			<p>A woman stood at the top of the stairs. Her hands rested on the marble balustrade; her white dress contrasted with the bright-coloured curtains behind her. She was very beautiful, but her face wore an expression of alarm and anxiety. Womanlike she asked three questions at once. “What has happened, Antonio? Have the people risen? Why have they been firing?” She paused timidly at the head of the stairs, as if fearing to descend.</p>
			<p>“All is well,” replied the President in his official manner. “Some of the disaffected have rioted, but the Colonel here has taken every precaution and order reigns once more, dearest.” Then turning to Sorrento, he went on: “It is possible that the disturbances may be renewed. The troops should be confined to barracks and you may give them an extra day’s pay to drink the health of the Republic. Double the Guards and you had better have the streets patrolled tonight. In case anything happens, you will find me here. Good night, Colonel.” He walked up a few steps, and the War-Minister, bowing gravely, turned and departed.</p>
			<p>The woman came down the stairs and they met midway. He took both her hands in his and smiled affectionately; she, standing one step above him, bent forward and kissed him. It was an amiable, though formal, salutation.</p>
			<p>“Well,” he said, “we have got through today all right, my dear; but how long it can go on, I do not know; the revolutionaries seem to get stronger every day. It was a very dangerous moment just now in the square; but is over for the present.”</p>
			<p>“I have passed an anxious hour,” she said, and then, catching sight for the first time of his bruised forehead, she started. “But you are wounded.”</p>
			<p>“It is nothing,” said the President. “They threw stones; now, we used bullets; they are better arguments.”</p>
			<p>“What happened at the Senate?”</p>
			<p>“I had expected trouble, you know. I told them in my speech that, in spite of the unsettled state of affairs, we had decided to restore the ancient Constitution of the Republic, but that it had been necessary to purge the register of the disaffected and rebellious. The Mayor took it out of the box and they scrambled over each other to look at the total electorates for the divisions. When they saw how much they were reduced they were very angry. Godoy was speechless; he is a fool, that man. Louvet told them that it must be taken as an instalment, and that as things got more settled the franchise would be extended; but they howled with fury. Indeed, had it not been for the ushers and for a few men of the Guard, I believe they would have assaulted me there and then in the very Chamber itself. Moret shook his fist at me⁠—ridiculous young ass⁠—and rushed out to harangue the mob.”</p>
			<p>“And Savrola?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Savrola⁠—he was quite calm; he laughed when he saw the register. ‘It is only a question of a few months,’ he said; ‘I wonder you think it worth while.’ I told him that I did not understand him, but he spoke the truth for all that;” and then, taking his wife’s hand in his, he climbed the stairs slowly and thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>But there is little rest for a public man in times of civil disturbance. No sooner had Molara reached the top of the stairs and entered the reception-room, than a man advanced to meet him from a door at the far end. He was small, dark, and very ugly, with a face wrinkled with age and an indoor life. Its pallor showed all the more by contrast with his hair and short moustache, both of which were of that purple blackness to which Nature is unable to attain. In his hand he carried a large bundle of papers, carefully disposed into departments by his long and delicate fingers. It was the Private Secretary.</p>
			<p>“What is it, Miguel?” asked the President; “you have some papers for me?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Sir; a few minutes will suffice. You have had an exciting day; I rejoice it has terminated successfully.”</p>
			<p>“It has not been devoid of interest,” said Molara, wearily. “What have you got for me?”</p>
			<p>“Several foreign despatches. Great Britain has sent a note about the Sphere of Influence to the south of the African Colony, to which the Foreign Minister has drafted a reply.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! these English⁠—how grasping, how domineering! But we must be firm. I will maintain the territories of the Republic against all enemies, internal or external. We cannot send armies, but, thank God, we can write despatches. Is it strong enough?”</p>
			<p>“Your Excellency need have no fears. We have vindicated our rights most emphatically; it will be a great moral victory.”</p>
			<p>“I hope we shall get material as well as moral good out of it. The country is rich; there is paying gold; that explains the note. Of course we must reply severely. What else?”</p>
			<p>“There are some papers relating to the army, commissions and promotions, Sir,” said Miguel, fingering one particular bundle of his papers, the bundle that lay between his first and second fingers. “Those sentences for confirmation, a draft of Morgon’s Budget for information and opinion, and one or two minor matters.”</p>
			<p>“H’m, a long business! Very well, I will come and see to it. Dearest, you know how pressed I am. We shall meet tonight at the dinner. Have all the Ministers accepted?”</p>
			<p>“All but Louvet, Antonio. He is detained by business.”</p>
			<p>“Business, pooh! He is afraid of the streets at night. What a thing it is to be a coward! Thus he misses a good dinner. At eight then, Lucile.” And with a quick and decided step he passed through the small door of the private office followed by the Secretary.</p>
			<p>Madame Antonio Molara remained standing for a moment in the great reception-room. Then she walked to the window and stepped out on to the balcony. The scene which stretched before her was one of surpassing beauty. The palace stood upon high ground commanding a wide view of the city and the harbour. The sun was low on the horizon, but the walls of the houses still stood out in glaring white. The red and blue tiled roofs were relieved by frequent gardens and squares whose green and graceful palms soothed and gratified the eye. To the north the great pile of the Senate House and Parliament buildings loomed up majestic and imposing. Westward lay the harbour with its shipping and protecting forts. A few warships floated in the roads, and many white-sailed smacks dotted the waters of the Mediterranean Sea, which had already begun to change their blue for the more gorgeous colours of sunset.</p>
			<p>As she stood there in the clear light of the autumn evening, she looked divinely beautiful. She had arrived at that age of life, when to the attractions of a maiden’s beauty are added those of a woman’s wit. Her perfect features were the mirror of her mind, and displayed with every emotion and every mood that vivacity of expression which is the greatest of woman’s charms. Her tall figure was instinct with grace, and the almost classic dress she wore enhanced her beauty and harmonised with her surroundings.</p>
			<p>Something in her face suggested a wistful aspiration. Lucile had married Antonio Molara nearly five years before, when he was in the height and vigour of his power. Her family had been among the stoutest supporters of his cause, and her father and brother had lost their lives on the battlefield of Sorato. Her mother, broken down by calamity and sorrow, lived only to commend her daughter to the care of their most powerful friend, the general who had saved the State and would now rule it. He had accepted the task at first from a feeling of obligation to those who had followed his star so faithfully, but afterwards from other motives. Before a month had passed he fell in love with the beautiful girl whom Fortune had led to him. She admired his courage, his energy, and his resource; the splendours of the office that he filled were not without their influence; he offered her wealth and position⁠—almost a throne; and besides he was a fine figure of a man. She was twenty-three when they married. For many months her life had been a busy one. Receptions, balls, and parties had filled the winter season with the unremitting labour of entertaining. Foreign princes had paid her homage, not only as the loveliest woman in Europe, but also as a great political figure. Her salon was crowded with the most famous men from every country. Statesmen, soldiers, poets, and men of science had worshipped at the shrine. She had mixed in matters of State. Suave and courtly ambassadors had thrown out delicate hints, and she had replied with unofficial answers. Plenipotentiaries had explained the details of treaties and protocols, with remarkable elaboration, for her benefit. Philanthropists had argued, urged, and expounded their views or whims. Everyone talked to her of public business. Even her maid had approached her with an application for the advancement of her brother, a clerk in the Post Office; and everyone had admired her until admiration itself, the most delicious drink that a woman tastes, became insipid.</p>
			<p>But even during the first few years there had been something wanting. What it was Lucile had never been able to guess. Her husband was affectionate and such time as he could spare from public matters was at her service. Of late things had been less bright. The agitation of the country, the rising forces of Democracy, added to the already heavy business of the Republic, had taxed the President’s time and energies to the full. Hard lines had come into his face, lines of work and anxiety, and sometimes she had caught a look of awful weariness, as of one who toils and yet foresees that his labour will be vain. He saw her less frequently, and in those short intervals talked more and more of business and politics.</p>
			<p>A feeling of unrest seemed to pervade the capital. The season, which had just begun, had opened badly. Many of the great families had remained in their summer residences on the slopes of the mountains, though the plains were already cool and green; others had kept to their own houses in the city, and only the most formal entertainments at the palace had been attended. As the outlook became more threatening it seemed that she was able to help him less. Passions were being roused that blinded the eyes to beauty and dulled the mind to charm. She was still a queen, but her subjects were sullen and inattentive. What could she do to help him, now that he was so hard pressed? The thought of abdication was odious to her, as to every woman. Must she remain directing the ceremonies of the Court after the brilliancy had died out, while enemies were working night and day to overturn all that she was attached to?</p>
			<p>“Can I do nothing, nothing?” she murmured. “Have I played my part? Is the best of life over?” and then, with a hot wave of petulant resolve, “I will do it⁠—but what?”</p>
			<p>The question remained unanswered; the edge of the sun dipped beneath the horizon and at the end of the military mole, from the shapeless mound of earth that marked the protecting battery of the harbour, sprang a puff of smoke. It was the evening gun, and the sound of the report, floating faintly up to her, interrupted the unpleasing reflections which had filled her thoughts; but they left a memory behind. She turned with a sigh and reentered the palace; gradually the daylight died away and it became night.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
