<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Life’s Compensations</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Much had happened, though but a few hours had passed since Savrola left his house to hurry to the Mayoralty. The deep and intricate conspiracy, which had been growing silently and in secret for so many months, had burst on the world’s stage and electrified the nations. All Europe had learned with amazement of the sudden and terrible convulsion that in a few hours had overthrown the Government which had existed for five years in Laurania. In the fighting that had raged throughout the ninth of September upwards of fourteen hundred persons had been killed and wounded. The damage done to property had been enormous. The Senate-House was in flames; the palace had been destroyed; both, together with many shops and private houses, had been looted by the mob and the mutineers. Fires were still smouldering in several parts of the city; in many homes there were empty places and weeping women; in the streets the ambulances and municipal carts were collecting the corpses. It had been a momentous day in the annals of the State.</p>
			<p>And all through the terrible hours Lucile had waited, listening to the sound of the musketry, which, sometimes distant and fitful, sometimes near and sustained, suggested the voice of a wrathful giant, now sunk in sulky grumblings, now raised in loud invective. She had listened in sorrow and suspense, till it was lost in the appalling din of the cannonade. At intervals, between the bathos of the material consolations of the old nurse⁠—soup, custards, and the like⁠—she had prayed. Until four o’clock, when she had received a message from Savrola acquainting her with the tragedy at the palace, she had not dared to add a name to her appeals; but thenceforward she implored a merciful Providence to save the life of the man she loved. Molara she did not mourn: terrible and cruel as was his death, she could not feel she had suffered loss; but the idea that he had been killed on her account filled her heart with a dreadful fear of guilt. If that were so, she said to herself, one barrier was removed only to be replaced by another. But the psychologist might cynically aver that force and death were the only obstacles that would restrain her affection for Savrola, for above all she prayed for his return, that she might not be left alone in the world.</p>
			<p>Her love seemed all that was left to her now, but with it life was more real and strongly coloured than in the cold days at the palace amid splendour, power, and admiration. She had found what she had lacked, and so had he. With her it was as if the rising sunbeam had struck the rainbow from the crystal prism, or flushed the snow peak with rose, orange, and violet. With Savrola, in the fierce glow of love the steady blue-white fires of ambition had become invisible. The human soul is subjected to many refining agents in the world’s crucible. He was sensible of a change of mood and thought; no longer would he wave his hat at Fate; to his courage he had now added caution. From the moment when he had seen that poor, hideous figure lying on the steps of the palace, he had felt the influence of other forces in his life. Other interests, other hopes, other aspirations had entered his mind. He searched for different ideals and a new standard of happiness.</p>
			<p>Very worn and very weary he made his way to his rooms. The strain of the preceding twenty-four hours had been tremendous, and the anxieties which he felt for the future were keen. The step he had taken in overruling the Council and sending the prisoners into foreign territory was one the results of which he could not quite estimate. It was, he was convinced, the only course; and for the consequences he did not greatly care, so far as he himself was concerned. He thought of Moret⁠—poor, brave, impetuous Moret, who would have set the world right in a day. The loss of such a friend had been a severe one to him, privately and politically. Death had removed the only disinterested man, the only one on whom he could lean in the hour of need. A sense of weariness, of disgust with struggling, of desire for peace filled his soul. The object for which he had toiled so long was now nearly attained and it seemed of little worth, of little comparative worth, that is to say, beside Lucile.</p>
			<p>As a Revolutionist he had long made such arrangements with his property as to make sure of a competence in another land, if he had to fly Laurania; and a strong wish to leave that scene of strife and carnage and to live with the beautiful woman who loved him took possession of his mind. It was, however, his first duty to establish a government in the place of that he had overthrown. Yet when he reflected on the cross-grained delegates, the mean pandering crowd of office-seekers, the weak, distrustful, timid colleagues, he hardly felt that he cared to try; so great was the change that a few hours had worked in this determined and aspiring man.</p>
			<p>Lucile rose to meet him as he entered. Fate had indeed driven them together, for she had no other hope in life, nor was there anyone to whom she could turn for help. Yet she looked at him with terror.</p>
			<p>His quick mind guessed her doubt. “I tried to save him,” he said; “but I was too late, though I was wounded in taking a shortcut there.”</p>
			<p>She saw his bandaged arm, and looked at him with love. “Do you despise me very much?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“No,” he replied; “I would not marry a goddess.”</p>
			<p>“Nor I,” she said, “a philosopher.”</p>
			<p>Then they kissed each other, and thenceforward their relationship was simple.</p>
			<p>But in spite of the labours of the day Savrola had no time for rest. There was much to do, and, like all men who have to work at a terrible pressure for a short period, he fell back on the resources of medicine. He went to a little cabinet in the corner of the room and poured himself out a potent drug, something that would dispense with sleep and give him fresh energy and endurance. Then he sat down and began to write orders and instructions and to sign the pile of papers he had brought with him from the Mayoralty. Lucile, seeing him thus employed, betook herself to her room.</p>
			<p>It was about one o’clock in the morning when there came a ringing at the bell. Savrola, mindful of the old nurse, ran down and opened the door himself. Tiro, in plain clothes, entered. “I have come to warn you,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Of what?”</p>
			<p>“Someone has informed the Council that you have released the prisoners. They have summoned an urgency meeting. Do you think you can hold them?”</p>
			<p>“The devil!” said Savrola pensively. Then after a pause he added, “I will go and join them.”</p>
			<p>“There are stages laid by road to the frontier,” said the Subaltern. “The President made me arrange them in case he should wish to send Her Excellency away. If you decide to give up the game you can escape by these; they will hold them to my warrant.”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Savrola. “It is good of you to think of it; but I have saved this people from tyranny and must now try to save them from themselves.”</p>
			<p>“You have saved the lives of my brother-officers,” said the boy; “you can count on me.”</p>
			<p>Savrola looked at him and an idea struck him. “These relays were ordered to convey Her Excellency to neutral territory; they had better be so used. Will you conduct her?”</p>
			<p>“Is she in this house?” inquired the Subaltern.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Savrola bluntly.</p>
			<p>Tiro laughed; he was not in the least scandalised. “I am beginning to learn more politics every day,” he said.</p>
			<p>“You wrong me,” said Savrola; “but will you do as I ask?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly, when shall I start?”</p>
			<p>“When can you?”</p>
			<p>“I will bring the travelling-coach round in half-an-hour.”</p>
			<p>“Do,” said Savrola. “I am grateful to you. We have been through several experiences together.”</p>
			<p>They shook hands warmly, and the Subaltern departed to get the carriage.</p>
			<p>Savrola went upstairs and, knocking at Lucile’s door, informed her of the plan. She implored him to come with her.</p>
			<p>“Indeed I wish I could,” he said; “I am sick of this; but I owe it to them to see it out. Power has little more attraction for me. I will come as soon as things are settled, and we can then be married and live happily ever afterwards.”</p>
			<p>But neither his cynical chaff nor arguments prevailed. She threw her arms round his neck and begged him not to desert her. It was a sore trial. At last with an aching heart he tore himself away, put on his hat and coat, and started for the Mayoralty.</p>
			<p>The distance was about three quarters of a mile. He had accomplished about half of this when he met a patrol of the rebel forces under an officer. They called on him to halt. He pulled his hat down over his eyes, not wishing for the moment to be recognised. The officer stepped forward. It was the wounded man to whom Savrola had entrusted the escorting of the prisoners after the surrender of the palace.</p>
			<p>“How far are we away from the Plaza San Marco?” he asked in a loud voice.</p>
			<p>“It is there,” said Savrola pointing. “Twenty-third Street is the number.”</p>
			<p>The rebel knew him at once. “March on,” he said to his men, and the patrol moved off. “Sir,” he added to Savrola, in the low, quick voice of a man in moments of resolve, “I have a warrant from the Council for your arrest. They will deliver you to the Admiral. Fly, while there is time. I will take my men by a roundabout way, which will give you twenty minutes. Fly; it may cost me dear, but we are comrades; you said so.” He touched Savrola’s wounded arm. Then louder to the patrol: “Turn down that street to the right: we had better get out of the main thoroughfare; he may sneak off by some lane or other.” Then again to Savrola: “There are others coming, do not delay;” and with that he hurried after his men. Savrola paused for a moment. To go on was imprisonment, perhaps death; to return, meant safety and Lucile. Had it been the preceding day, he would have seen the matter out; but his nerves had been strained for many hours⁠—and nothing stood between them now. He turned and hurried back to his house.</p>
			<p>The travelling-coach stood at the door. The Subaltern had helped Lucile, weeping, into it. Savrola called to him. “I have decided to go,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Capital!” replied Tiro. “Leave these pigs to cut each other’s throats; they will come to their senses presently.”</p>
			<p>So they started, and as they toiled up the long ascent of the hills behind the city, it became daylight.</p>
			<p>“Miguel denounced you,” said the Subaltern; “I heard it at the Mayoralty. I told you he would let you in. You must try and get quits with him some day.”</p>
			<p>“I never waste revenge on such creatures,” replied Savrola; “they are their own damnation.”</p>
			<p>At the top of the hill the carriage stopped, to let the panting horses get their wind. Savrola opened the door and stepped out. Four miles off, and it seemed far below him, lay the city he had left. Great columns of smoke rose from the conflagrations and hung, a huge black cloud in the still clear air of the dawn. Beneath the long rows of white houses could be seen the ruins of the Senate, the gardens, and the waters of the harbour. The warships lay in the basin, their guns trained upon the town. The picture was a terrible one; to this pass had the once beautiful city been reduced.</p>
			<p>A puff of white smoke sprang from a distant ironclad, and after a while the dull boom of a heavy gun was heard. Savrola took out his watch; it was six o’clock; the Admiral had kept his appointment with scrupulous punctuality. The forts, many of whose guns had been moved during the night to the landward side, began to reply to the fire of the ships, and the cannonade became general. The smoke of other burning houses rose slowly to join the black, overhanging cloud against which the bursting shells showed white with yellow flashes.</p>
			<p>“And that,” said Savrola after prolonged contemplation, “is my life’s work.”</p>
			<p>A gentle hand touched his arm. He turned and saw Lucile standing by him. He looked at her in all her beauty, and felt that after all he had not lived in vain.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Those who care to further follow the annals of the Republic of Laurania may read how, after the tumults had subsided, the hearts of the people turned again to the illustrious exile who had won them freedom, and whom they had deserted in the hour of victory. They may, scoffing at the fickleness of men, read of the return of Savrola and his beautiful consort, to the ancient city he had loved so well. They may learn how Lieutenant Tiro was decorated for his valour in the war with the little bronze Lauranian Cross which is respected all over the world; of how he led the Lancers’ polo team to England according to his desire, and defeated the Amalgamated Millionaires in the final match for the Open Cup; of how he served the Republic faithfully with honour and success and rose at last to the command of the army. Of the old nurse, indeed, they will read no more, for history does not concern itself with such. But they may observe that Godoy and Renos both filled offices in the State suited to their talents, and that Savrola bore no malice to Miguel, who continued to enjoy good-fortune as a compensation for his mean and odious character.</p>
			<p>But the chronicler, finding few great events, other than the opening of colleges, railways, and canals, to recount, will remember the splendid sentence of Gibbon, that history is “little more than the register of the crimes, follies, and misfortunes of mankind”; and he will rejoice that, after many troubles, peace and prosperity came back to the Republic of Laurania.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
